### Civil Aviation In India


1. [mindmap](https://github.com/aaditirokade/thesis/blob/master/mindmap/mindmap.png) : http://www.xmind.net/m/chz5

2. [user profiles/ system diagram](https://github.com/aaditirokade/thesis/blob/master/outline/userProfiles_systemDiagram-01.png)


#####  Comparative Analysis of Airlines

- Domestic
- International
- Timeline

	- Monthly
	- Yearly

- Ticket fare
- No. of fleets, aircrafts, seats

#### Location-based analysis

##### Metro-cities : Mumbai, Delhi, Calcutta, Hyderabad

##### Flights

- Domestic
- International
- Timings
- Frequency

##### Airports

- No. of airports
- domestic
- international

##### Population

- Access to airport

#### Performance & Safety

##### On time performance

##### Bookings and cancellations

##### Flight Accidents

##### Operations Economics

- Fuel prices
- PLF, BELF
- Flight equipment, maintenance

##### ATC

##### Weather: effects of global warming

#### External Factors

##### Indian Festivals

- Month
- Religion affected

##### Environment & Policies

- Global Warming
- Change in policies

#### Implementation

##### Datasets

Airline- International Traffic (2015-18)
http://dgca.gov.in/reports/rep-ind.htm

Airline- Domestic Traffic (2015-18)
http://dgca.gov.in/reports/rep-ind.htm

Domestic Traffic Reports
http://dgca.gov.in/reports/rep-ind.htm

Handbooks of Civil Aviation
http://dgca.gov.in/reports/rep-ind.htm

-  Tourism Statistics : Government  of India
- Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA)

##### Format

- Comparative Analysis 5/10 years
- Predictive Analysis
- Machine Learning
- Data mining from reports: python
- Website/ Webpage: Interactive

#### Does Global Warming affect Air Travel in India thereby affecting festivities in India?

#### Does Global Warming affect tourism in India?

#### How does Passenger Traffic vary during Indian festivals?

#### Is Civil Aviation in India equipped for future passenger traffic?

#### Performance & safety  is one of the major factors of consideration for the passengers to decide amongst airlines

#### This Passenger Traffic trends analysis is based on the monthly and annual reports generated by DGCA India 

The Audience will expect to see the comparative analysis and trends- growth or decline in the passenger traffic, which is the favored or disliked airline etc.

#### Locations based analysis is the next step to look at data and statistics in terms of geography

The audience will expect to see the information/ stats  for metro-cities on flights, population, airport, airfares, options they have in terms of airlines etc.

#### How to enable airline passengers to make more intelligent and informed decisions?

##### Passenger Traffic Trends

-  Airlines Operators

	- Domestic

- Timeline

	- Monthly
	- Yearly

- Passenger Growth

	- Passenger Growth 

##### No. of fleets, aircrafts, seats

- Capacity

##### Ticket fares

##### Performance Analysis

- Passenger Growth
- Passenger Load Factor
- Cancellations

	- Delays

		- Denied Boarding

- Compliance of Route Dispersal Guidelines
- No. of Passenger Complaints 

	- Reasons

		- Refund
		- Staff Behavior
		- Disability
		- Customer
Service
		- Baggage
		- Fare
		- Food/Catering
		- Others

- Safety
- On-Time Performance (OTP)

	- Metro Airports

		-  Bangalore, Delhi, Hyderabad and Mumbai

	- Reasons for delay

		- Reactionary
		- Airport
		- Wx
		- ATC
		- Pax
		- Ramp
		- tech
		- Operations
		- Misc

- Revenue Earned& Seats Sold in Highest Fare Bucket

#### Users

##### Primary: Passengers

##### Secondary: Aviation

- Airport Management
- Airline Management
- ATC
- Stakeholders

##### Tertiary: Transportation

#### Level I: Overview

##### Conclusive : Representation of all factors 

##### Comparative analysis of 
domestic airlines, trends - timeline

#### Level 3: Rationalization 

##### Deep Dive into one/more factors

##### Cancellations

##### Safety/ Causes of accidents

#### Level 2: Filters & Interactivity

##### Filters to select from affecting factors

##### Will require description of factors unknown to regular passengers

##### Pie charts/ Bar charts etc (tentative)

#### Level 4: Probable core root causes

##### Direct users to more info 
on the subject matter

- Suggestive measures
- Links to related studies
- Similar global examples etc.

*XMind: ZEN - Trial Version*
