### Opioids: The Branding and Commercialization of Pain
Candice Joan Mai Chan
M.S Data Visualization Candidate, Parsons School of Design
B.A. SC Johnson College of Business, Cornell University

Thesis Advisors

Daniel Sauter
Aaron Hill

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master Science in Data Visualization at Parsons School of Design

May, 2019


### Abstract
Decades ago, opioids were reserved for catastrophic situations: patients coming out of major surgery, serious cancer, or end-of-life circumstances. There was a more holistic perception within the medical community of the potential risks associated with opioids compared to the benefits of opioids. Today, however,  in small towns and big cities across the United States, opioids have become a public health crisis. This project aims to explore the commercialization and branding of opioids and how tapping into pain as “the fifth vital sign” has created demand for instant relief and spikes in prescriptions. The data presented in this study can help sum up how pain is felt, who is being affected, where the epidemic is most prevalent, and what it is costing the United States while providing users with the knowledge to scrutinize messages being marketed towards them.


### Introduction
Upon its release in 1995, OxyContin was regarded as a medical triumph - a long lasting drug that could help patients combat pain. While it generated around thirty-five billion dollars in revenue for its manufacturer, Purdue Pharma, it also ignited a full-blown epidemic within the United States. Overdoses have surpassed gun violence and car crashes as one of the greatest cause of death for Americans under 55, its death toll is greater than those lost in Iraq and the Vietnam war combined, and has killed more than the H.I.V disease at its most vigorous stage. Few drugs are as dangerous as opioids and becoming hooked is nobody’s plan, so why are so many Americans touched by this wide spread problem?
In the past, doctors have been hesitant in prescribing opioids except for severe pain and end-of-life care because of its addictive tendencies. However, behind closed doors, Purdue Pharma, a pharmaceutical company headed by the Sackler family, launched a marketing campaign to cultivate a pain landscape that would change the prescribing habits of doctors and promote opioids, specifically OxyContin, as a drug to “start with and stay with”. On October 16, 2017, the US government declared the opioid epidemic a public health emergency - this aggressive marketing of painkillers has generated billions of dollars in revenues, but has also tragically fuelled the struggles of millions of addicts.  In order to understand how opioid use has grown so astronomically over the past two decades, this study plans to breakdown Purdue Pharmaceutical’s branding of OxyContin, which created one of the greatest commercial successes and public health tragedies. The article will begin by defining different types of pain and the history of pain management, highlight specific events that led to the current pain landscape in the United States, and walk through Purdue Pharma’s multifaceted marketing strategy. The accompanying data visualization showcases a variety of advertisements created and distributed by Purdue Pharma in order to represent how the carefully created image of the drug created a ubiquitous presence both in communities and medical practices across the United States that changed the way Americans perceive pain. It also specifies the who, what, where, and how of pain in the United States today: who feels the most pain? What does it cost the U.S? Where does the U.S feel pain? How does the U.S feel pain?

### BACKGROUND
### 2.1 What is Pain

“Pain is an unpleasant sensory or emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage, or described in terms of such damage.”
The International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) provides one of the most accepted definitions of pain. From this definition, it is clear that pain is felt both physically and emotionally. The uncomfortable sensory and emotional experience is an essential part of life. More than just a symptom, it serves as a warning signal, alerting the body to injury and helping patients restore their body back to health when already injured. Yet when pain persists, it becomes the main reason for seeking medical attention and relief. There are two main types of pain that this study addresses and for which opioid medications are often prescribed: acute and chronic.

1.Acute Pain Acute pain has a sudden onset with a specific cause. Usually, this sharp pain does not last more than six months and, when the underlying cause of the pain has cured, the pain goes away. Some causes of acute pain are broken bones, dental work, burns or cuts.

2.Chronic Pain Chronic pain is a recurrent pain that lasts more than six months and causes specific healthcare burdens to those affected. This type of pain is multifaceted - the pain signals can remain long after the cause has gone away, some people experience chronic pain even without apparent body damage, and people experience emotional effects such as depression, anger, anxiety, or fear. Some causes of chronic pain are arthritis, nerve pain, cancer, headaches, and back pain.
For many centuries, pain has been a long standing medical problem and one that has been hard to grapple within physiology. The physical, emotional, cognitive, and often subjective characteristics of pain make determining methods of combatting it ever more difficult.

### 2.2 Why are Opioids so Addictive?
Opioids block pain messages sent to the brain by attaching to opioid receptors on nerve cells in the brain, spinal cord, and other parts of the body. Opioids entice by providing an immediate sense of relief and tranquility, only to be trapped in a vicious cycle that rewires the brain after prolonged use. The following stages of opioid use walks through how the drugs’ strong lure can potentially turn from a one time use situation to addiction.

Different types of opioids

There are several types opioids that are known by many names, including: Codeine, Fentanyl, Hydrocodone, Oxycodone, Oxymorphone, and Morphine. These different types of opioids are prescribed in varying strengths and administered via pill, lozenges, lollipops, through vein, injection, IV, or a patch placed on the skin. The medication and brand of opioid most notorious for the opioid epidemic is OxyContin.

First Use: In the first use, a drug like opioid sends a surge of dopamine to the brain, creating feelings of euphoria and instant relief. As the high eventually wears off, it seems as though the drug has treated all pain without apparent side effects.
Tolerance: After the first use of opioids, people feel it is more challenging to cope with pain without the drug and often chase the feeling of the first high by turning to more opioids. As patients become more stressed, irritable, or anxious, they turn to opioids to feel the same high as they did the first time. However, at this point, the reward cycle flips: patients receive less satisfaction from the opioids and, as a result, take more to chase the same level of pleasure. The more they seek, the more the brain adapts to the drug and demands higher doses.

Physical Dependence: During the physical dependence stage, the body experiences withdrawal symptoms which can include increased pain sensitivity, insomnia, anxiety, and dysphoria.
Addiction: Signs of addiction include compulsive use, impaired control over the medication, continued use despite harm, and craving. For many, it may seem as though only another dose can fix the problem. Patients no longer “take the drug to get high, but to escape feeling low.”
The use of opioids to treat pain, however, is not a new phenomenon. For years, the United States has had a long history of pain management.

###2.3 History of Pain Management

The complex discussion of the proper way to acknowledge pain has fluctuated due to discussions concerning two main schools of thought: the under-treatment and the over-prescription of opioids.
In the 1800s, pain was regarded as simply a symptom of aging. Patients who experienced pain were marred with the stigma of being deluded, while patients who could not access or chose not to use drugs were referred to neurosurgery or psychotherapy as treatments. There were no proper regulations on the use of opioids, which contributed to widespread prescriptions of the medication for ailments ranging from diarrhea to toothaches.

At the turn of the 1900s, doctors’ attitudes of overprescription quickly morphed into debates over wanting to improve patients’ quality of life while fearing for the possibility of exposing people to addiction. When the Harrison Narcotic Control Act passed in 1914 in response to the sudden rise in street heroin and morphine abuse, both patients and physicians implemented stricter guidelines to avoid opioids. Even cancer patients were encouraged to avoid opioids at all costs unless their life could be “measured in weeks.” This attitude of “opiophobia” continued throughout the remainder of the twentieth century, which contributed to the under- treatment of pain the North America. However, this thought began to waver in the 1970s as several scientists challenged opioid under-treatments as a failure to treat patients in pain with the adequate medications.

The massive shift in opioid prescription and pain perception behaviours arrived in the 1980s and 1990s in two main waves. In the 1980s, several pain specialists suggested there was low correlation between opioids and addictive behaviour. A letter in the New England Journal of Medicine Collaborative stated that only 4 patients of 11,882 (0.03%) developed addiction while receiving opioids in the hospital. Another flawed study by Portnoy and Foley reviewed 38 patients on pain medication for non cancer-related pains which showed only 2 people having problems with drug management. In the 1990s, Ronald Melzack published an article in the Scientific American that questioned the reason opioids were reserved for cancer patients and restrained for people who experience chronic pain. These bold statements to push for drugs to treat long-term non-cancer related pains were made by cancer-pain specialists with no real expertise in other types of pains and disregarded the complexity of the psychological and biological factors related to pain management. Despite strong warnings of the adverse affects of this prescribing tactic, opioids grew into the main drug of choice to treat pain in the United States. Consequently, this contributed to the invention of the new pain field that convinced doctors to prescribe more freely, the shrewd marketing campaigns backed by pharmaceutical companies, and the framing of pain as the “fifth vital sign” - all of which drivers to the current opioid crisis.  

###2.4 Formation of the Pain Field
The pain field as we know it today was shaped by several government and non government organizations.

1.The Introduction of Pain as the “Fifth Vital Sign” In 1995, following concern for under management of pain, the American Pain Society, the Veteran’s Health Administration and the Joint Commission introduced pain as the “fifth vital sign”. The phrase “pain as the fifth vital sign” was initially coined to heighten awareness of pain treatment amongst healthcare professionals. As James Campbell stated in his presidential address for the American Pain Society, “vital signs are taken seriously. If pain were assessed with the same zeal as other vital signs are, it would have a much better chance of being treated properly…quality care means that pain is measured and treated”. The introduction of the 0-to-10 Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) intended to help healthcare professionals define pain and provide consistent communication by matching pain intensity to a number. When using this scale, the provider would ask, “on a scale of zero to ten, where zero means no pain and ten equal the worst possible pain, what is your current pain level?” While quick and efficient to analyze, this question provides a very one-dimensional sensory assessment of pain. A patient may experience different levels of pain in more than one areas of the body, making naming one number confusing. This scoring method also neglects the fundamental differences between acute and chronic pain. Although assessing acute pain using the NRS is efficient, various important aspects of chronic pain, such as the investigation of mood and psychological factors, are entirely missed in chronic pain assessment. Pain is complex and by trying to portray all its intricacies with one number diminishes the importance of a comprehensive pain assessment and promotes aggressive prescriptions habits.

2.Institute of Medicine In 1991, the Institute of Medicine and Quality Assurance Committee of the American Pain Society proposed to measure patient perceptions to gauge the quality of heath care at specific hospitals. Several studies were conducted to explore the high pain-high satisfaction paradox, which explains how patients with severe pain report high levels of satisfaction. Four main themes directly correlated to the overall satisfaction ratings: patient pain experience, patient views of providers, patient pain management experience, and pain management outcomes. It is clear that satisfied patients and an overall positive experience directly correlated to affective pain relief. However, this mentality highlights the difficulty patients have in separating the pain management experience from the entire patient care experience. As we see very clearly today, the link between pain management and overall positive experiences can lead to over zealous treatments to stifle short term pain.

3.The Hospital Consumer of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) Survey The HCAHPS survey, used since 2005 in many hospitals during a patient’s discharge, is one of the many patient satisfaction surveys that include three or more pain management related questions. According to The Centers for Medicare Services  (CMS), question 14 on the survey, “How often did the hospital or provider do everything in their power to control your pain?” is intended to measure overall experience, not to compare and measure the prescribing behaviours of practitioners. However, questions similar to question 14 on surveys promote the “pain as a fifth vital sign” culture - the belief that in order for there to be a positive overall experience, no pain should be experienced. In 2010, an extension to the HCAHPS survey rewarded hospitals that scored high in clinical outcomes and patient experience. The three questions focused on pain accounted for 30 percent of the overall score, weighing pain-related questions heavily over the rest of the survey. This new regulation left more conservative doctors with a difficult decision: to select the quick and risky route of prescribing pain medication or go the natural route only to face dissatisfaction from poor survey satisfaction scores, which also affected their compensation and promotion chances. This culture ingrained in surveys and the mindset of patients paralyzed well-meaning doctors and led to loosely controlled opioid prescriptions for everything from surgeries to minor aches.

4.2005 Deficit Reduction Act In 2005, a requirement by the Deficit Reduction Act forced hospitals to submit the results of the HCAHPS survey or face a penalty in Medicare reimbursement. This Purdue-JCAHO partnership reflects how the branding of opioids has been used to govern medical practice and decisions. By linking the results of the survey to a hospital’s ability to attain resources, the Deficit Reduction Act and creators of the satisfaction surveys, inherently prime the behaviours of doctors and nurses - forcing them to act one way despite better judgement.

###2.5 Branding of Purdue Pharmaceutical
Branding plays an integral role in commercial capitalism. As Sherman and Banet-Weiser noted, “it is not only a crucial mechanism that sustains the growth of markets, but a cultural process that organizes meanings and reflects fundamental social and cultural relations. The meanings that are organized and the knowledge that is produced through the branding processes create a context for consumptions, which frames the ways in which consumers relate to and interpret their relation to products, experience values, and the world around them.”  In a way, branding is a way of “conducting the conduct” of potential consumers. Carefully calculated promotional strategies can predict, alter, and control the behaviour of customers and, in some cases, the environment with which the product inhabits. In commercial marketing today, the line of how far marketers go to sell a product is blurred- targeted advertisements, breach in privacy, or unknown extraction of data are not foreign and succumbing to the allure of shiny new products does not mean life or death. Yet, in pharmaceutical marketing, the stakes are higher.

Unlike other global medical industries, the U.S medical industry allows manufacturers to advertise their drugs directly to the consumer. It comes as no surprise then that an abundance of illness leads to higher drug manufacturer profits. The ability to advertise directly to consumers allows manufacturers to govern- shape the conduct of potential customers and a culture advantageous to “selling sickness”, one in which medication is coveted, prescription is less regulated, and ideology is aligned with profit motives.

In 1996, when Purdue Pharma introduced its popular opioid drug, OxyContin, sales grew drastically from $48 million in 1996 to $1.1 billion in 2000. By 2004, OxyContin grew to become the leading drug of abuse in the United States.  Yet, this shift did not occur by accident. Calculated marketing techniques shed light on how Purdue Pharma controlled key players in the medical industry and flipped the perception of pain in the U.S to create one of the greatest commercial successes and public health tragedies of the past decade.

###2.6 Aligning Purdue with Key Players
Controlled drugs, under their guise of benevolence, can cause greater health risks than uncontrolled drugs when they are over promoted and prescribed. Purdue Pharma, a small family owned company, spent $200 million on its marketing campaigns to align OxyContin with key medical experts, doctors, and insurers who could make the drug even more ubiquitous.

Prescribers - Sales Representatives, Primary Care Physicians, and Paid Speakers:
One of the main factors of Purdue’s marketing campaign and a long standing pharmaceutical marketing tactic to garner momentum for new drugs is the strategic mobilization of medical experts. Sales representatives travel to clinics, hospitals, and family practices to promote new products or drugs directly to medical experts. In 2000, Purdue gathered a team of 671, which quickly grew to 2500, sales representatives to market OxyContin to around 94,000 doctors. This tactic of charging expert medical thought leaders to speak positively about the new drug to professionals, workshops, and medical conferences ensured that the drug reached the correct people.

Another method that Purdue Pharma used to aligned itself with influential medical experts was to gather marketing data to alter doctor’s prescribing habits. Drug companies compiled prescriber profiles on doctors throughout the US, focusing on each person’s prescribing patterns. Through the data, Purdue could assess the exact location of high and low prescribers - the zip code, city, state, or entire country. From the information Purdue gathered from the prescriber profiles, the company could predict locations that have the greatest number of chronic pain patients by pinpointing doctors who were the highest and most willing prescribers of opioids. This extremely targeted use of data helped Purdue efficiently identify and distribute sales representatives to those specific physicians to further market OxyContin. Once there, the sales representatives provided clinics with a starter coupon program, a free 1-to-30 day supply of OxyContin. In order to incentivize sales representatives to continually promote the drug, Purdue paid $40 million in one year’s worth of sales competitive bonus system that awarded annual bonuses of up to $240,000 to those who had the highest sales of OxyContin.
The team also drew upon branded items, such as OxyContin branded hats, toys, music CDs, luggage tags, pens, and coffee mugs to expands its reach.

Education - Medical Journals, Hospitals, Universities, and Pain-Related Programs:
Branding governs and alters the buying habits of consumers. Purdue Pharma brilliantly aligned itself with educational endeavours and institutions to not only add credibility to the OxyContin drug, but also brand Purdue Pharma as the expert on the pain industry. In addition to promoting OxyContin in medical journals, Purdue also sponsored “continued medical education” workshops which acted as a promotional activity and a recruitment opportunity for the company. According to Van Zee, from 1996 to 2001, Purdue sponsored more than 20,000 pain-related “educational programs” and 40 national pain management conferences.” Over five thousand medical professionals attended the events and were later recruited to the team of paid speakers.

By acting as the benefactor to the American Academy of Integrative Pain Management, American Chronic Pain Association, and American Pain Society, Purdue Pharma formed powerful alliances with hospitals and companies and utilized each organization’s offering to better promote OxyContin. Hospital programs, in particular, were focused on teaching health care organizations how to adhere to new pain standards. Interestingly, Purdue was the only company that was able to distribute its own advertisements to JCAHO health organizations. This relationship put Purdue at an unfair advantage over other drug companies as it opened the doors to thousands of hospitals, which extended Purdue’s marketing campaign reach.

This technique of “strategic ubiquity” as described by Dumit, creates a universe of branded pain relief  through partnerships with influential third parties and organizations. For a consumer or physician who is deciding upon which medication to try to alleviate pain, most information they come across gradually conditions them towards actions that benefit Purdue Pharma.

Direct-to-Consumer Advertising
Direct-to-Consumer (DTC) advertising for prescription drugs is legal in only two countries, the United States and New Zealand, and has sparked ongoing debates with both vocal advocates and challengers regarding its role in amplifying the prescription sales and availability of opioids. Since many promotional materials were able to bypass the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) review of their accuracy, truthfulness, and scientific validity before dissemination, many included more commercially-oriented advertising messages targeting consumers who did not have sufficient medical knowledge. To understand exactly how DTC advertising affected patients and healthcare professionals, it is vital to consider the steps between viewing the advertisement and patient outcomes.
This begins with the advertisement’s content. The FDA is responsible for ensuring that the content is truthful; however, the FDA’s failure to this responsibility is evident as numerous advertisements that were not submitted for pre-approval were still introduced in the marketplace. In addition, FDA surveys of physicians and consumers highlight that DTC advertisements increased patient awareness of medical treatments, but also misguided patients on a drug’s risks and benefits. In addition, DTC advertising resulted in many patients seeking prescription drug treatments from their doctors, many of which were inappropriate for the specific problem. Due to hopes in maintaining the patient-doctor relationship, some  physicians may have felt pressure to prescribe prescriptions drugs in response to direct patient requests, thus increasing physician prescription patterns across the United States.
These findings, along with the other marketing techniques laid out in this section, are important as they address a non-trivial gap in consumers’ knowledge of how patient-physician interactions and the pharmaceutical industry’s commercial goals impact prescribing decisions. The following data visualization highlights how these aspects amplified the sales of opioids throughout the United States.  

### Treatment

This data visualization gathered data from four publicly available data sets and merged them together in a way that highlights the question at hand: how does advertisements affect prescriptions? The following sections below provide an overview of the sources used and the various data processing stages.

### 3.1 Data Processing
This section provides a high level overview of the processing steps taken. To see the step by step process of the code used, please view the documentation on Github.

The most important functions used to gather, join, and filter through the data are seen in the thesis.js and specialtychart files. For instance, in order to create the data points used in the “How Does the United States Feel Pain?” chart, I changed all the undefined or NAN points to zero. In addition, in order to create the total percentage of opioids number, I created a function that automatically added the long acting opioids and standard opioid percentages together.

### 3.2 Key Data Sources
The visualization portion of this thesis uses the Part D Prescriber Summary Table data set for calendar years 2013 to 2016. This data set was created with the aim of making the healthcare system more transparent and accountable and provides information on prescription drugs prescribed by physicians and other health care providers. This Medicare plan covers both generic and brand-named prescription drugs. The Part D Prescriber Summary Table is based on information from the Centres for Medicare and Medicaid Service’s (CMS) Chronic Conditions Data Warehouse, comprised of prescription drug records submitted by both Medicare Prescription Drug (MAPD) plans and by Prescription Drug Plans (PDP). The classification of opioid and long-acting opioids information presented in the data set is based upon the most recently updated 2018 Medicare Part D Over utilization Monitoring System (OMS).

The data set organizes and identifies medical providers by the National Provider Identifier number (NPI). For each provider, the data set provides a value for the total number of prescriptions that were dispensed which comprises of original prescriptions and refills. The total drug cost were compiled of ingredient cost of the medication as well as dispensing fees, sales tax, and administration fees.

Time Frame

The submission cutoff date for the Part D Prescriber Summary Table data set for calendar years 2013 to 2016 is June 30th following the end of the preceding calendar year. For instance, the 2016 Part D Prescriber data set includes data received through June 30, 2017.

Population

This data set contains information from individual providers, nursing homes, non-physician practitioners, residential treatment facilities, surgery centres, and other providers.  

Data Contents 

These are the following variables used in the first and second chart displayed in the data visualization and how they are used to create each respective output. The information regarding the collection of the data derived from CMS’ pamphlet on the Medicare Part D prescription data set  How Does the United States Feel Pain?

1.opioid_prescriber_rate The opioid prescriber rate is one of the percentages used to make up the total opioid prescriber rate seen in the sentence that appears as the user hovers over a specific point.

 2.la_opioid_prescriber_rate The long acting opioid prescriber rate is one of the percentages used to make up the total opioid prescriber rate seen in the sentence that appears as the user hovers over a specific point.

3.specialty_description
The specialty description data is derived from the supplier specialty code reported on the NPI’s Part B claims. If providers have more than one area of medical specialty reported on their claims, the specialty with the largest number of services is reported. I used the specialty code to help users filter through the information and specify an area of medicine they would like to explore.

4.opioid_claim_count
The opioid claim count in combination with the long-acting opioid claim count is used to derive the total opioid claim count number that appears in the sentence when users hover over a point.

5.la_opioid_claim_count
The long acting opioid claim count in combination with the opioid claim count is used to derive the total opioid claim count number that appears in the sentence when users hover over a point.

6.nppes_provider_state
The provider state is used as a filtering device to allow users to focus on one area within the United States.

What is it Costing the United States?

total_drug_cost
 The total drug cost variable is the total drug cost paid for all claims. This value comprises of ingredient cost, dispensing fee, sales tax, and vaccine administration fees. I used this to show users how much money is spent on drugs in each particular area of medicine.

2.la_opioid_drug_cost This value comprises of ingredient cost, dispensing fee, sales tax, and vaccine administration fees. I used this to show users how much money is spent on drugs in each particular area of medicine. This number is used in combination with the opioid drug costs number to show the total cost in drugs that one area in medicine spends on long acting opioids.

3.opioid_drug_cost
This value comprises of ingredient cost, dispensing fee, sales tax, and vaccine administration fees. I used this to show users how much money is spent on drugs in each particular area of medicine. This number is used in combination with the long acting opioid drug costs number to show the total cost in drugs that one area in medicine spends on opioids.

4.generic_drug_cost
The generic drug cost and brand drug cost variables are used in combination to show how much of the total drug cost number is allocated to each of these two types of drugs.

5.brand_drug_cost
The generic drug cost and brand drug cost variables are used in combination to show how much of the total drug cost number is allocated to each of these two types of drugs.

6.nppes_provider_state
The provider state is used as a filtering device to allow users to focus on one area within the United States.

Data Limitations  

Although the Part D Prescriber data set provides information which enables us to gain a better view of the prescription patters in the United States, there are some limitations to the data. Since the data set only includes information on people enrolled in the Medicare Part D prescription program, the data may not be representative of a physician’s entire practice. Another important factor missing is that the data does not shine light on the quality of care provided.

### 3.3 Design Decisions
This thesis went through four main design stages its in creation: discover, define, develop, and deliver. In hopes of increasing awareness of the role marketing techniques played in the transformation of the pain landscape, this design focuses on various advertisements made during the formative years of the opioid crisis and the subsequent effects they had on prescription habits.  There are four main portions of the visualization beginning with an exploration of advertisements and documents followed by three question to be answered by the accompanying chart: 1) how does the United States feel pain, 2) What is it costing the United States, and 3) What are the most commonly used opioids?

The Advertisements:
 The first portion of the visualization showcases advertisements, marketing materials, and documents that played integral roles in changing the pain landscape within the United States. Each of the advertisements are grouped into one of four main steps to which they most relate. As users scroll down the page, they see thumbnail versions of each advertisement paired with a short introduction on the four steps that contributed to the transformation of the pain landscape. If they wish to explore a certain step further, they can click on the advertisement and a full-screen modal appears with an enlarged version of the advertisements with short commentary on the intentions behind it.

From this modal, users are able to click through to explore all other advertisements on full screen.  
The split pane views of the steps, displayed from left to right, is intentional as it provides a sense of rhythm as the user reads the steps from beginning to end. Instead of feeling like a list, it adds a more exploratory element to the design. In addition, by grouping advertisements by theme, users can more easily identify patterns within the advertisements while viewing them in thumbnail view. The advertisements in this portion of the project are all made between the years of 1995 to 2010 to show how advertisements released during the formative years of the Opioid crisis had a major impact on the current crisis.

How Does the United States Feel Pain?

While the previous portion of the project shows the making of the Opioid epidemic, the first chart in the visualization portrays the current results of these marketing tactics by allowing users to view prescription habits of doctors. This chart allows users to explore opioids as a percentage of total prescriptions for specific doctors across all states and different fields in medicine. The initial view of the chart is a single line of points arranged in descending order based on opioids as a percentage of total prescriptions, which is intended to show the overall trend of prescriptions. There are two types of points displayed in this chart: the point with solely one colour, either white or yellow, determines whether or not a doctor used long acting opioid or standard opioids whereas the point with a yellow inner circle and outer white circle indicates a doctor who used both types of opioids at his or her clinic. As users hover over the dots, three main aspects appear: 1) a sentence which names the doctor and the state in which he or she practices, 2) the total percentage of opioids prescribed, and 3) a breakdown of the percentage of long acting or standard opioids used. The white and yellow lines that extend for the original point show the breakdown of different types of opioids and is intended to show whether or not certain areas of medicine or states are more inclined to use a certain type. Finally, users can scroll the chart to the left to see many more points. Instead of cutting off the data points to what is visible on the screen, this decision aims to show the gravity of the epidemic.

What Is It Costing the United States?

After viewing the various areas in medicine and states that are most affected by heavy opioid prescriptions, viewers are then guided to a chart which portrays the breakdown of costs within a certain area of medicine and state. The idea behind the layout of this chart is to make the circle mimic a pill. One half of the pill represents total costs of drugs for a specific areas of medicine, further broken down by generic and branded drugs. The other half of the pill represents total cost of drugs spend on opioids, further broken down by total opioid drug costs and long acting opioid drug costs. By analyzing how much of each half circle is filled yellow, users are able to quickly visualize which areas of medicine spend the most in total and on opioids.

What are the Most Commonly Used Opioids:
The final portion of the visualization shows the top eight opioids used throughout the United States. This is intended to be an introduction to the different types of opioids to inform users on the various types of opioids that make up the numbers portrayed in both the cost and prescription breakdown seen in the previous two charts.

The headings at the beginning of each section are formatted as questions and the subheadings are formatted as a dynamic sentence which is intended to provide insight to the question. This is designed to provide users with a compact sentence packed with information on what they are seeing in the visualization. In order to change a certain aspect of the visualization, they simply need to change the options provided in the drop down menu of each portion of the sentence.

### 3.4 Findings

The following section explains overall patterns that run throughout the project and findings found in each of the three portions of the visualization. The explanation starts with a media analysis on the advertisements shown during the exploratory phase of the project then leads into insights on the following charts displayed.

Media Analysis

By analyzing the collection of advertisements displayed in the data visualization, I recognized certain events and tactics that contributed to a shift in how people communicate pain culture. Three main findings emerged from the analysis of the advertisements: 1) pharmaceutical companies marketed to physicians, not the public, 2) advertisements downplayed the side effects of the drugs, and 3) the behind-the-scenes effort to create a more lax attitude towards pain medication prescriptions actually contributed most to the transformation of the pain landscape.

Marketing to Physicians, not the Public

The salesforce advertisements make one fact very clear: it was not the public, but physicians that were the targets of opioid marketing. Image 7, an advertisement for Purdue Pharmaceutical’s OxyContin, portrays a large image of a physician with the words “Let experience be your guide”. Although this advertisement lists out some of the downsides of OxyContin, it clearly acts as a mechanism to assure doctors that they have enough experience to make the correct decision on prescribing OxyContin. This advertisement is reflective of the change in the United States’ pain communication culture because it shows how direct-to-consumer marketing of drugs made it much easier for pharmaceutical companies to market directly to whomever they wish to target. Similarly, image 8, an excerpt from a leader in the medical industry, states that addiction is rare in patients treated with narcotics. This tactic to market to doctors and convince them to speak positively about opioids or downplay the concerns with opioids is an extremely clever method in communicating pain management. Here, the pharmaceutical companies are not directly defending their products or trying to sell their products to consumers. Instead, they are selling to physicians and convincing them to relay the message to their patients. In the patients’ eyes, physicians are seen as figures of benevolence who will heal their pains; therefore, physicians ensuring patients that opioids are safe is an immensely more impactful way in delivering the message.

Downplay the Side Effects

In addition to advertisements marketed towards physicians, Purdue Pharma also created advertisements that downplayed the drug’s serious side effects by writing statements, such as “the most serious risk with opioids, including OxyContin, is respiratory depression” and falsely promising OxyContin as “easy to dose, easy to titrate.” All these messages corroborate with the messages that Purdue Pharmaceuticals sold to the physicians: OxyContin is a safe drug with little side effects. Therefore, when messages in the advertisements catered to the public align with messages touted by physicians, users are more likely to be convinced that opioids are harmless.

Behind-the-Scenes Changes in Pain Medication Prescriptions

Although the lengths some pharmaceutical companies took to market their drugs is surprising, these aggressive marketing techniques were, in many ways, simply the smoke. The real fire to the epidemic was the behind-the-scenes effort to create a more lax attitude towards prescribing opioids, one which made physicians more inclined to accept OxyContin and other forms of opioid drugs. Image 14 is an example of one of the steps taken to promote this lax attitude. While an efficient way to match pain to a number, the Numeric Rating Scale diminished the complexity of the often ambiguous and multi-dimensional feeling of pain by forcing patients to name only one number to describe what they were feeling. This, in turn, encouraged doctors to adopt heavier prescribing patterns as numbers relating to seven, eight, or above would immediately warrant pain medications. Further evidence of the behind-the-scenes methods to manipulate the pain landscape is evidenced by image 15, which highlights how hospitals included questions relating to pain management satisfaction in order to define which hospitals were doing well. For instance, in this HCAHPs survey, one question reads “during this hospital stay, did you have any pain?” This is an unrealistic question to ask as it attributes a positive hospital stay to having no pain at all, therefore awarding doctors who prescribe more pain medications.

Chart Analysis

Prior to the project, it seemed rationale to think that fields of medicine in which major surgeries are performed resulted in higher overall prescription rates. However, by exploring the first chart, it is interesting to note that, in fact, more common fields in medicine have higher overall prescriptions of opioids. Areas such as, family practice, nurse practitioners, and dentistry have some of the highest rates of opioid prescriptions. This finding is interesting as it follows a pattern which runs throughout the project: the opioid crisis started and spread under the guise of benevolence. The majority of marketing tactics utilized figures that represent comfort and trust in order to persuade patients. For instance, doctors, who should heal instead of harm, were used to falsely persuade people into believing in the good of opioids instead of responsibly warning people of the adverse affects. Hospitals, an establishment which should place patients’ long-term health as its top priority, promoted the use of opioids in order to subdue pain in the short-term only to increase addictive tendencies in the long run. Consequently, the high prescription rates for family practitioners and dentists seen in the first chart show how doctors who are most familiar to us and whom we visit most often are prescribing the most opioids. The mix of opioids are also very different depending on area of medicine. For example, the fields in medicine which predominately use standard opioids are dentistry, dermatology, emergency medicine, orthopaedic surgery, oral surgery, plastic and reconstructive surgery, podiatry, and urology. The fields in medicine which use a balanced mix of standard and long acting opioids are family practice, internal medicine, and nurse practitioners. This information could help research professionals determine the reasons certain fields are more inclined to use one type of opioid as opposed to another type and whether or not one type affects patients more severely.
When exploring the second chart, it was interesting to learn the areas of medicine which had the greatest total cost of drugs across all states. The top three areas with the greatest total cost of drugs ranked as family practice with $14,816,808, Internal Medicine with $9,636,438, and Nurse Practitioners with $6,096,635. The top three areas of medicine with the greatest overall cost in opioids ranked as Anesthesiology with $1,387,300, Physician Assistant with $51,006, and Family Practice with $496,532. By following the trail of costs, researchers could gain a better idea on how drugs are distributed amongst areas of medicine and whether or not greater amount spent on opioids correlate to higher number of prescriptions. In this cost chart, the only area of medicine which shows correlation between high number of prescriptions and high amounts spent on both opioids and other drugs is family practice.

### Considerations and conclusion

 This project aims to allow the general public to explore how advertisements are used to subtly change an environment to the benefit of major players and how the clever marketing techniques contributed to the opioid epidemic. To that aim, there are still elements that have not been implemented into this project. These are highlighted in this section and will hopefully be included in additional interactions to further discussions on this visualization.

Currently, this visualization shows advertisements created between the years of 1995 and 2010. These are advertisements that were created while the opioid epidemic was first gaining momentum. A key component missing is the inclusion of opioid or counter-opioid advertisements present today by the same or different pharmaceutical companies. This would be an interesting factor to include as it would show the metamorphosis of healthcare marketing and whether or not the same techniques are still successful today. This addition would also analyze the pharmaceutical companies that have suffered from the opioid crisis, those that have maintained success, and the specific factors that contributed to each of those outcomes. Similarly, the charts currently show data points for years 2013 to 2016, which portrays how advertisements increased overall prescription within the United States. In order to strengthen this argument, I would like to include data points for years 1995 to 2000 to track the prescription rates at the initial years of the opioid epidemic.

Other improvements would be to include a section which matches advertisements to pharmaceutical companies. This addition would allow users to track the big players in this crisis and pinpoint the companies that created the greatest output of marketing materials. From this, the visualization could track the specific drug that is most prescribed by looking at the specific brands that these pharmaceutical companies make. This implementation would be beneficial as it would allow people to understand the specific maker and name of drug that is contributing most to the epidemic and, perhaps, find ways to regulate its distribution.

In recent years, the opioid crisis has become a topic synonymous with the United States and its tragic affects on towns big and small have dominated the headlines. Although the current consequences of the epidemic are well documented, the phases leading up to the epidemic are less known. Therefore, the goal of my project is to add to this discussion from the perspective of pain management and discuss how changes in the definition of pain and its perception led to a shift in marketing methods and consumption habits. Exploring the methods  used to drive commercial success of opioids could help patients question the messages being  advertised to them and shine light on the alarming reality in the world of modern medicine: patients are dying in unprecedented numbers from therapies prescribed to treat pain. Pain is a complex and abstract feeling that is difficult to define and even more difficult to cure. Perhaps a better understanding of it and the ways in which the United States is configured to treat pain could place patients, not pharmaceutical companies, in the position of power to determine how best to manage their pain. 

### References
 1.Katz, Josh, and Margot Sanger-katz. "'The Numbers Are So Staggering.' Overdose Deaths Set a Record Last Year." The New York Times. November 29, 2018. Accessed May 11, 2019. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/11/29/upshot/fentanyl-drug-overdose-deaths.html.
2.Joseph, Andrew. "New Details Revealed about Purdue's Marketing of OxyContin." STAT. January 18, 2019. Accessed May 11, 2019. https://www.statnews.com/2019/01/15/massachusetts-purdue-lawsuit-new-details/.
3.Jones, Mark R., Omar Viswanath, Jacquelin Peck, Alan D. Kaye, Jatinder S. Gill, and Thomas T. Simopoulos. "A Brief History of the Opioid Epidemic and Strategies for Pain Medicine." Pain and Therapy. June 2018. Accessed May 11, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5993682/.
4.”IASP Terminology." IASP. Accessed May 11, 2019. https://www.iasp-pain.org/Education/Content.aspx?ItemNumber=1698#Pain.
5.”Acute Pain vs. Chronic Pain." Cleveland Clinic. Accessed May 11, 2019. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/articles/12051-acute-vs-chronic-pain.
6.”Working to End the Epidemic." The Washington Post. May 25, 2018. Accessed May 12, 2019. https://www.washingtonpost.com/brand-studio/optum/working-to-end-the-epidemic/.
7.“Working to End the Epidemic.”, 3
8.Jones, Mark R., Omar Viswanath, Jacquelin Peck, Alan D. Kaye, Jatinder S. Gill, and Thomas T. Simopoulos. "A Brief History of the Opioid Epidemic and Strategies for Pain Medicine." Pain and Therapy. June 2018. Accessed May 11, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5993682/.
9.Zhang, Sarah. "The One-Paragraph Letter From 1980 That Fueled the Opioid Crisis." The Atlantic. June 02, 2017. Accessed May 11, 2019. https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2017/06/nejm-letter-opioids/528840/.
10.Portenoy, R. K., and K. M. Foley. "Chronic Use of Opioid Analgesics in Non-malignant Pain: Report of 38 Cases." Pain. May 1986. Accessed May 11, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2873550.
11. Melzack, R. "The Tragedy of Needless Pain." Scientific American. February 1990. Accessed May 11, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2296714.
12. Pain: The Fifth Vital Sign. Department of Veterans Affairs. October 2000. Available at http://www.va.gov/PAINMANAGEMENT/docs/Pain_As_the_5th_Vital_Sign_Toolkit.pdf Accessed October 5, 2016.
13. Morone, Natalia E., and Debra K. Weiner. "Pain as the Fifth Vital Sign: Exposing the Vital Need for Pain Education." Clinical Therapeutics. November 2013. Accessed May 12, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3888154/.
14.  Beck, Susan L., Gail L. Towsley, Patricia H. Berry, Karen Lindau, Rosemary B. Field, and Shantelle Jensen. "Core Aspects of Satisfaction with Pain Management: Cancer Patients' Perspectives." Journal of Pain and Symptom Management. January 2010. Accessed May 12, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19879107.
15. Bernard, Stephen A., Paul R. Chelminski, Timothy J. Ives, and Shabbar I. Ranapurwala. "Management of Pain in the United States-A Brief History and Implications for the Opioid Epidemic - Stephen A Bernard, Paul R Chelminski, Timothy J Ives, Shabbar I Ranapurwala, 2018." SAGE Journals. Accessed May 12, 2019. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1178632918819440#articleCitationDownloadContainer.
16. Bernard, 4.
17. "HospitalHCAHPS." CMS.gov Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. December 21, 2017. Accessed May 12, 2019. https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments/HospitalQualityInits/HospitalHCAHPS.html.
18. Sherman, 595.
19. Banet-Weiser, Sarah. Authentic™ the Politics of Ambivalence in a Brand Culture. New York, NY: New York University Press, 2012.
20. Sherman, and Melina. "How to Train Your Opioid Consumer: Branding Painkillers in the Opioid Epidemic." OUP Academic. October 12, 2017. Accessed May 12, 2019. https://academic.oup.com/ccc/article-abstract/10/4/593/4662964?redirectedFrom=fulltext.
21. Van Zee, Art. "The Promotion and Marketing of Oxycontin: Commercial Triumph, Public Health Tragedy." American Journal of Public Health. February 2009. Accessed May 12, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2622774/.
22. Van Zee, 4
23. Sherman, and Melina, 5.
24. Van Zee, Art, 4.
25. Sherman, and Melina, 8.
26. Dumit, Joseph. Drugs for Life: How Pharmaceutical Companies Define Our Health. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2012.
27. Fain, Kevin M., and G. Caleb Alexander. "Mind the Gap: Understanding the Effects of Pharmaceutical Direct-to-consumer Advertising." Medical Care. April 2014. Accessed May 12, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4031617/#R1.
28. "Part D Prescriber." CMS.gov Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. May 01, 2019. Accessed May 12, 2019. https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Medicare-Provider-Charge-Data/Part-D-Prescriber.html.
29. Part D Prescriber, 1.
